Out and Proud Charter The Bank of England’s founding charter states that the Bank exists to “promote the  public good and benefit of the people.”  In order to do this effectively we must be  representative of the diverse population we serve. The Bank is committed to  building an inclusive working environment for all colleagues and to promoting  LGBT+ diversity and inclusion within and beyond our organisation’s walls. The Bank of England Out and Proud Charter is a public commitment to supporting  our LGBT+ colleagues. We invite other organisations to consider adopting this  Charter, or one similar to it, for the benefit of LGBT+ diversity and inclusion in their  workplace. This principles-based Charter aims to ensure that we take steps to create  a safe, inclusive environment where people from the LGBT+ community can bring  their whole selves to work, irrespective of their sexual orientation, gender identity or  gender expression. Principle 1 – We commit at the highest level to support our LGBT+ colleagues • At the most senior levels in the organisation we will visibly support the LGBT+ community. Visible support is an enabler for LGBT+  people to be their whole selves at work. It can also encourage dialogue between the community and others. • An Executive Sponsor for LGBT+ colleagues will represent issues affecting the community at the most senior level and drive  meaningful change.   Principle 2 – We empower and regularly consult an Employee Network for LGBT+ colleagues   and their allies • We recognise the importance of an effective Employee Network for LGBT+ colleagues and allies, providing a forum where they can  give and receive support to and from their peers.  • We empower the LGBT+ Network to support our HR team by providing constructive input into the organisation’s policies, processes  and training, and thereby help to hold us to account.   Principle 3 – We commit to enforcing a zero tolerance approach to LGBT+ harassment and bullying • We commit to ensuring that anti-bullying and harassment policies are adhered to and are the responsibility of everyone at every level  within an organisation.  • We have clearly documented, effective, fair processes for dealing with reports of LGBT+ harassment and bullying. Principle 4 – We promote LGBT+ awareness in the workplace • A lack of understanding of LGBT+ issues can foster an environment that may be unwelcoming for LGBT+ colleagues. We will combat  this by providing materials and training specifically on LGBT+ issues.  Principle 5 – We will capture meaningful data to monitor and publish progress • Individuals can find formal disclosure of sexual orientation and gender identity/expression difficult or even distressing in a workplace  setting. Therefore, traditional methods of capturing data may not always be appropriate. However, given the importance for an  organisation of understanding the diversity of its workforce, we will think creatively about how we can reassure colleagues and  encourage disclosure. Data collected should be handled with the appropriate degree of anonymity and sensitivity.   • We will seek publicly to benchmark our performance against peers and to learn from others.