142 On the Principles  on which the Funds of Life Assurance Societies should be Invested.  By  ARTHUR  HUTCHESON  BAILEY,  Esq., Actuary  of the London Assurance. [Read before the Institute, 24th February, 1862, and printed by order of the Council.] OF the many valuable contributions by which  the transactions of this  Institute have  been  enriched  by the labours  of Mr. Samuel Brown, not  the least  interesting is the paper  on  the  investments of Assurance  Companies,  read  before  the  Institute  on  the  25th January, 1858.  I  feel  much diffidence in again  reverting to this question;  but as Mr. Brown, at the outset of his paper, admits that the subject is too extensive to be exhausted by a single discussion, it has occurred to me that  an  attempt  to  arrive  at  some  general principles  on which  the funds  of Life Assurance Societies  should be invested, and to consider how such principles can best be reduced * Supposing a permanent rate of addition of £1. 10s. per cent, per annum.1862.] of Assurance Societies should be Invested. 143 to practice, might, perhaps, be the means of exciting  some  useful discussion. Of the two main elements on which  all life assurance transac- tions depend—the  rate  of mortality and the rate of  interest—the latter, I think, affords more scope for the exercise of judgment and skill than the former.  From my own observation and experience, I  incline to  the  belief,  that,  while  there are probably some  not inconsiderable variations in  the rates  of mortality experienced by different Offices, these variations are due less to what is called (not very accurately) the selection of lives—the effect  of which, I think, is generally over-estimated—than  to the differences  of class  from which the selection has to be made.  However this may be, as far as  the  mortality  is concerned,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the amount  of  interest  realised  on the  assets  can  be materially  in- fluenced by the  degree  of  judgment  and  knowledge  brought  to bear upon the  subject.  Mr. Brown  has given some apt  illustra- tions of how considerably the accumulation of capital is affected by very small differences in the rate of interest. From the nature  of the business  of  Life Assurance Societies, their  financial  arrangements  can  be  made  under  some  material advantages, which it  is important to keep clearly in view.  They engage to pay fixed sums of money at  periods generally long dis- tant from  the  time when  the  contracts  are entered into: in mer- cantile phraseology, they may be said to accept bills drawn at very long dates.  Unlike Fire Insurance Companies, where the  profits of years are  sometimes  swept  away by the  disasters  of as many days, the probable amount  of demands  on their resources can be calculated,  from  time to  time, within  not  very wide limits.  To such  an extent is this the case, that, notwithstanding  all the dis- turbing  effects  that  war, famine,  and  pestilence  have  produced, I  doubt whether the ill success of  any life assurance project  has ever been truly attributable  to excessive mortality.  Further : Life Assurance Societies, unlike banks and commercial enterprises gene- rally,  are  not  exposed  to  sudden or  unusual  demands  on  their resources in times of panic and financial difficulty;  and the object of  their investments  is not  to  obtain income for  the purpose of expenditure, but to accumulate capital for the payment of claims. From a careful consideration of these peculiarities, I think that the main principles to be observed in investing the funds of a Life Assurance Society are the following, viz.:— 1.  That the first consideration should invariably be the security of the capital.144 On the Principles on which the Funds [APRIL 2.  That  the  highest practicable rate  of interest be  obtained, but that this principle should always be subordinate to the previous one, the security of the capital. 3.  That  a small  proportion  of  the  total  funds  (the  amount varying  according  to  the  circumstances  of  each individual case), should be held in readily convertible  securities for the payment of current claims, and for such loan transactions as may be considered desirable. 4.  That the remaining and  much larger proportion may safely be invested in securities that are not readily convertible;  and that it is desirable, according to the  second principle, that it should be so invested,  because  such  securities,  being  unsuited  for  private individuals  and  trustees,  command  a  higher  rate  of  interest  in consequence. 5.  That, as far  as practicable, the  capital should  be employed to aid the life assurance business. The first two principles may, perhaps, be looked upon as mere truisms.  But it should not be forgotten that life assurance invest- ments should not  always be regulated by the same considerations as trusts  for  private and  family purposes.  In  the latter, usually the most important matter is to secure a fixed, or, at all events, an undiminishing  income—fluctuations  in  the  value  of  the  capital being less inconvenient. If these principles generally are sound, it follows, I think, that some modes of investment which are commonly resorted to should be avoided.  It  may  seem  a  bold  assertion, but, nevertheless,  I believe it to be true, that the English Funds are altogether unsuited for  life  assurance  investments.  For income  they offer  probably the  best  security the  world  has yet  seen;  but with  us that  is a secondary consideration;  the  capital, the security of  which is our first  object, is subject  to  very inconvenient  fluctuations  in value. But it will be urged, that, on account of their ready convertibility, some portion of the assets should always be invested in the Funds. This advantage I believe  to be more apparent  than  real.  In the practical working  of  Life Offices  it will commonly be found  that, in an easy condition of the money market, the funded property has a  tendency  to  increase, although  the purchases must,  of  course, then be made  at  prices above the average—because, money being plentiful, eligible securities  are then  scarce.  In  periods  of  pres- sure, on the other hand, when  favourable opportunities for invest- ment are abundant, the funded property is practically inconvertible, from the determination not  to effect  sales at a loss, except in cases1862.] of Assurance Societies should be Invested. 145 of absolute necessity.  I believe that the Assurance Companies are now much less extensive fundholders than formerly.  But there is still  a  prevalent idea that  one half  the assets  should  always be invested in the Funds.  Upon this rule the wealthiest of the Offices still  acts, and  the idea has been  so fostered  by the large  profits realised  by some of the older Companies  from  their  purchases at the beginning of this century, that it seems necessary to point out that  the  risk  is  now in  the opposite direction, and that  perfect security is very far from being one of the advantages of the Funds. The  same  considerations  apply  to  the  Preference  Stocks of Railway and other Companies, which are now very popular. It  is, I think, generally admitted that  the  ordinary stock  and shares of trading and other Companies are not eligible for Assurance Societies' investments, as being  too speculative.  Yet so potent is the  influence  of  the  magic words,  " Bank  of England," that  an exception  is usually made  in favour  of  Bank  Stock,  in apparent forgetfulness  that  the dividends  of this  great Corporation mainly depend  upon  the  fluctuating  and  uncertain  profits  of  a  par- ticular  business—that  of  banking.  How little  the  exception  is justifiable  by facts, a glance  at  the price lists  of a comparatively short  period will show.  It will be found  that, in 1840, the price of Bank  Stock was  marked  at  156;  while  it is  now  (February, 1862), 244. Leaving the consideration of what investments to avoid, for the more difficult task of what to select, it  seems to me that, for what may be called the working capital, the smaller portion of the assets which is required to be readily convertible, the system of  deposits with  joint-stock  banks  and  discount  establishments  affords  the greatest  advantages.  These  deposits  are  always  available  on demand, or at  short  notice, without  expense, and without risk  of depreciation  like Exchequer  Bills.  I  think  that it is  important that  the amount  to be thus  held  on  deposit  should  be regulated always by the financial requirements  of  the Office, and never  by the  rate  of interest.  I  have  frequently  had  occasion to observe, that the effect of making transfers  to permanent investments from deposit accounts, from  dissatisfaction  with the low rate  of interest on the latter, has been to obtain a small increase in the interest at a  serious  cost  to  the  capital.  It  will  also probably  be  thought prudent  to  divide the total  amount  of  deposits  among  different establishments. According  to  the  principles  attempted  to  be  laid  down, the most desirable form  of permanent  investments seems to be bonds146 On the Principles on which the Funds, &c. [APRIL and  mortgages—including  in  that  term  every  species  of  loan secured on tangible property;  the preference  being given  to such as require policies as collateral security, as life interests, &c., where assurances are indispensable.  I cannot think  that it is altogether a justifiable proceeding to insist on assurances being effected which the security does not  require, strong as may be the temptation to such a course;  it would be better to stipulate at once for a higher rate  of interest.  Indeed, when  a borrower finds the  loan  which he does require, subjected to a deduction for a premium on a policy of  two  or three  times the  amount, which  he does not require— accompanied,  as is sometimes the case, with  a rather  pharisaical announcement, that  no higher  rate  of interest  than 5 per cent, is ever  taken—he  must  be  reminded  of  the  olden  time, when  the pecuniary  necessities  of  gentlemen  of  the  Charles  Surface  class were supplied in a currency composed of pictures, wine, and money, in very uncertain proportions. As,  however,  the  competition  for  such  securities  is  on  the increase, it  is impracticable  for  Offices whose  funds  are large, to invest more than a part of their assets in this manner.  In seeking for other descriptions  of mortgages, our  principles will lead us to select  such  as  cannot  readily be realised, avoiding  those that  are open  to  the  competition  of  private  trustees.  For  example,  an advance under any of the land drainage Acts, in consideration of a rent  charge  for  a term  of years, will command  a  higher rate of interest than a mortgage  in  fee  on  the  same estate, although the former charge has priority over the latter.  In like manner, secu- rities  on  the  rates of  counties  and  towns, and,  generally,  loans where  the  principal  is  repayable  by  instalments,  are,  I  think, worthy of attention. One other class  of investments I will mention, which is  quite in accordance with the principles laid down, and which seems to me peculiarly  adapted  for  a portion  of the  funds  of  Life Assurance Societies—I mean the purchase of reversionary interests.  A banker carries on  a lucrative business  by receiving  money on deposit  at one rate of interest and employing it at a higher rate;  and I believe that  a  margin  of  1 per  cent.,  or  less, will  suffice  to  cover  risks and  expenses,  and yield in  addition  a not  inconsiderable  profit. Surely, then,  an Assurance Company may usefully employ, in  the purchase  of reversions, part  of funds which  are not repayable  at short notice, but which  are to  accumulate during  the lives of  the assured, when it  is  considered that  the margin  is probably three times as great as suffices for the operations of the banker.  I have,1862.] Memoir of the late John Finlaison, Esq. 147 therefore, never been able to understand  how such institutions as Reversionary Interest Societies can have come into existence. In concluding this hasty and imperfect sketch of a subject on which  much  difference  of  opinion  exists, and  on which a volume might be written, I  have purposely avoided  entering  into  details, or attempting to lay down rules  by which  the merits of any indi- vidual security are to be judged.  I am aware, too, that other than merely financial considerations  must  sometimes be  allowed  their influence—as, for instance, it may be fairly urged that Government securities must be held to inspire confidence with the public.  But, I  think  it will be  admitted,  that  the finances of Life Assurance Societies ought  to be managed  on  some clear general  principles, and not, as is sometimes  the  case, left  to  depend  on the passing impulses  of  the  day,  or  on  ideas  derived  from  other  and  very different pursuits.